Add Data Viz Foundation (#5709)
jpmorganchase/salt-ds: site/docs/foundations/data-visualization/color-and-pattern.mdx

---
title: Color and pattern
layout: DetailTechnical
---

Color is a valuable tool that helps effectively present data in your visualization. Using color correctly guides users’ attention and supports their understanding and interpretation of data.

## Color usage

Consider the purpose and impact of color in your chart. Color can be used to:

- **Show relationships**:
  Use similar colors to imply that items are related. Contrasting colors, however, show that items are from distinct categories.

- **Represent data values**:
  Color helps to give a clearer indication of range and how data values are distributed; for instance, highs and lows.

- **Highlight key elements**:
  Use color to direct your audience's attention towards the main element or emphasize data that supports the story you’re communicating.

- **Indicate meaning**:

>   Some colors are strongly associated with certain objects, concepts or emotions. Leveraging these associations helps you communicate more efficiently and improves comprehension of your chart.

Reviewer: Such as...

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-color-usage.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-color-usage-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of bar chart in a hover state."
/>

## Categorical palette

> The categorical palette is designed to visualize distinct groups of items. Categories are designed to be displayed in numerical order to maximize color contrast and visual clarity. It is recommended not to associate status or sentiment with category colors, as these are covered by separate characteristics. Additionally, the color assigned to each numerical category may vary between themes or if the palette is updated in the future, so relying on color for meaning could lead to inconsistencies.

Reviewer: Is this written the right way round? Maybe we can simplify? "Don't associate cat colors with status or sentiment. Use the dedicated characteristics in this case for a consistent UX" (for example).  (I would avoid mention of themes at this point).

---
title: Color and pattern
layout: DetailTechnical
---

Color is a valuable tool that helps effectively present data in your visualization. Using color correctly guides users’ attention and supports their understanding and interpretation of data.

## Color usage

Consider the purpose and impact of color in your chart. Color can be used to:

> **Show relationships**

Reviewer 2: Same comment about the hierarchy

Reviewer 3: +1

Use similar colors to imply that items are related. Contrasting colors, however, show that items are from distinct categories.

**Represent data values**
Color helps to give a clearer indication of range and how data values are distributed; for instance, highs and lows.

**Highlight key elements**
Use color to direct your audience's attention towards the main element or emphasize data that supports the story you’re communicating.

**Indicate meaning**
Some colors are strongly associated with certain objects, concepts or emotions. Leveraging these associations helps you communicate more efficiently and improves comprehension of your chart.

> <Image

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what this is illustrating, it's a little vague. Perhaps if we included a Chart with positive, negative, and neutral colors we could illustrate color having a strong association with a concept or emotion.

Reviewer 3: Thank you! Could we add a legend to explain the colors and possible update the labels to make it a little clearer too?

  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-color-usage.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-color-usage-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of bar chart in a hover state."
/>

## Categorical palette

The categorical palette is designed to visualize distinct groups of items. It features contrasting colors with different hues, indicating the lack of visual relationship between the data sets. The categorical palette achieves a minimum of 3:1 contrast against each of the 3 supported background colors in Salt - in both light and dark mode.

> For more information, please refer to the [Categorical color page](salt/foundations/color/categorical-colors).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, please refer to the [Categorical color page](/salt/foundations/color/categorical-colors).
```

<Image
  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-color-order.png"
  srcDark="/img/foundations/dataviz-color-order-dark.png"
  alt="Diagram of the categorical color palette."
/>

## Patterns

> According to [WCAG](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html), color shouldn’t be the only distinguishing factor to convey information about your data. To improve your chart’s accessibility for users with accessibility requirements, use additional visual cues, such as line and background patterns. The order of line patterns and pattern fills is pre-set.

Author: Updated

> If you’re migrating from UITK to Salt, the line patterns and pattern fills used in the Salt charts are direct 1:1 copies from UITK’s patterns.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this is necessary. I believe, as a rule, we don't mention UITK (other than the migratory theme) within the external website. We could say the same about the category colors etc, but we choose not to.

### Line patterns

> Line patterns can be used in charts that display multiple lines. There are 19 line patterns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

Line patterns can be used in charts that display multiple lines, helping users distinguish between different data series. Salt provides 19 distinct line patterns to support clear and accessible data visualization.
```

> <Image

Reviewer 3: Missing a dark mode equivalent.

  src="/img/foundations/dataviz-line-patterns.png"
  alt="Diagram of the available line patterns."
/>

### Pattern fills

> Charts that contain two-dimensional shapes with area, such as rectangles or slices, can be filled with patterns. There are 20 pattern fills.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Charts that include two-dimensional shapes with area, such as rectangles or slices, can be enhanced with pattern fills. Salt offers 20 distinct pattern fills to help differentiate data sets..
```

<Image

>   src="/img/foundations/dataviz-pattern-fills.png"

Reviewer 3: Also this image doesn't have a dark mode equivalent.
